IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025 1175
Wearable Epilepsy Seizure Detection on FPGA
With Spiking Neural Networks
Paola Busia , Gianluca Leone , Andrea Matticola , Luigi Raffo , Member, IEEE,
and Paolo Meloni , Member, IEEE
Abstract—The development of epilepsy monitoring solutions
suitable for everyday use is a very challenging task, where
different constraints should be c ombined, resulting from the re-
quired accuracy standards, the unobtrusiveness of the monitoring
device, and the efﬁciency of real-time operation. Considering
the time-varying nature of the electroencephalography signal
(EEG), Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) represent a promising
solution to model the evolutio no ft h eb r a i ns t a t eb a s e do nt h e
history of the previously processed signal. This work proposes
an extremely lightweight SNN-based seizure detection solution,
utilizing a simple encoding scheme to ensure high levels of
sparsity. Despite the reduced complexity, the model provides
a detection performance comparable with the state-of-the-art
SNN-based approaches on the evaluated data from the CHB-
MIT dataset, reaching a 96% area under the curve (AUC)
and allowing 99.3% average accuracy, with the detection of
100% of the examined seizure events and a false alarm rate
of 0.3 false positives per hour. The suitability for real-time
inference execution on wearable monitoring devices was assessed
on SYNtzulu, demonstrating 0.5 μs inference time with 4.55 nJ
energy consumption.
Index Terms —Electroencephalography, spiking neural net-
works, wearable.
I. I NTRODUCTION
T
HE World Health Organization estimates that 50 million
individuals worldwide suffer from epilepsy, making it the
most prevalent chronic brain condition[1]. People with epilepsy
suffer from sudden seizure events, compromising the normal
electrical activity of the brain and resulting in danger even
Received 13 March 2025; revised 2 May 2025; accepted 26 May 2025.
Date of publication 30 May 2025; date of current version 10 December 2025.
This work was supported in part by the European Union’s Horizion 2020
Research and Innovation Progr am under Grant GA 101140052 (H2TRAIN),
in part by the NextGenerationEU Mission 4, Component 2, Investment
1.5, CUP B83C22002820006—Project METBIOTEL—Innovation Ecosystem
ECS 0000024 ROME TECHNOPOLE SPOKE 1, and SPOKE 6, and in part
by Chips Joint Undertaking in EdgeAI “Edge AI Technologies for Optimised
Performance Embedded Processing” pr oject. The Edge AI project members
include top up funding by Austria, B elgium, France, Gr eece, Italy, Latvia,
Netherlands, and Norway under grant agreement No 101097300. Funded by
the European Union. Views and opinions expressed are however those of the
author(s) only and do not necessarily reﬂect those of the European Union or
the Chips Joint Undertaking. Neither the European Union nor the granting
authority can be held responsible for them. This paper was recommended by
Associate Editor H. Chen. (Corresponding author: Paola Busia.)
The authors are with the Dipartimento di Ingegneria Elettrica ed
Elettronica, University of Cagliari, 09123 Cagliari, Italy (e-mail:
paola.busia@unica.it; gianluca.leone94@unica.it; a.matticola@studenti.
unica.it; raffo@unica.it; paolo.meloni@unica.it).
Color versions of one or more ﬁgures in this article are available at https://
doi.org/10.1109/TBCAS.2025.3575327.
Digital Object Identiﬁ er 10.1109/TBCAS.2025.3575327
during normal life activities. Due to this reason, both patients
and caregivers have a great interest in the development and
optimization of reliable remote monitoring solutions.
The standard diagnostic reference is represented by the elec-
troencephalography (EEG) signal, which is typically analyzed
by expert physicians to recognize the onset of seizure events.
However, artiﬁcial intelligence approaches to automate EEG
processing have been t horoughly explored in the literature,
resulting in remarkable accuracy i n the seizure classiﬁcation
[2] and seizure prediction tasks [3], but reaching adequate
standards in the low-power w earable domain is still an open
research challenge.
Recently, due to the developments in neuromorphic com-
puting, epilepsy monitoring solutions based on Spiking Neural
Networks (SNNs) have been proposed, as an extremely energy-
efﬁcient approach for real-time long-term monitoring. The SNN
mechanism offers an interesting opportunity to model the signal
amplitude and frequency information with optimal efﬁciency,
thanks to the inherent time-dependency in the network evo-
lution, allowing us to consider the context of previously pro-
cessed inputs. Furthermore, the binary encoding of the data
removes the workload associated with multiplication execution,
thus SNN inference mainly invo lves addition operations. Due
to these reasons, SNNs represent a perfect candidate for low-
power wearable monitoring solutions, which are gaining in-
creasing interest [4], [5], [6], [7].
Nonetheless, most of the spiking solutions addressing
epilepsy monitoring overlook relevant issues, such as the need
to reduce the acquisition setup to a low-count subset of unobtru-
sive channels, minimizing the stigma of a monitoring device to
be used in normal life, or the need to reduce the number of false
alarms, in order to improve the reliability and avoid provoking
unnecessary stress to the patient. Fur thermore, full utilization
of the sparsity and efﬁciency of spiking models requires spe-
cialized neuromorphic hardware [8], [9].
In this work, we propose an extremely lightweight SNN-
based epilepsy monitoring solution to address these relevant
issues, by using only acquisition from the 4 temporal chan-
nels and offering a classiﬁcation accuracy compatible with the
detection of all the occurred seizure events, with a reduced
number of false alarms. Cons idering accessibility as a key
objective, we exploit SYNtzulu [10], a tiny low-power SNN
processor design that can be squeezed on low-cost and limited-
resources FPGAs such as the Lattice iCE40UP5K, which was
previously considered as a target for real-time biological signal
© 2025 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Co mmons Attribution 4.0 Licen se. For more information,
see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
1176 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025
processing [11], [12]. The main contributions can be summa-
rized as follows:
•a spiking solution for seizure detection from the raw EEG
signal, leveraging a simple and effective encoding scheme
and a lean SNN, ensuring the detection of 100% of the
tested seizure events, with 99.3% segment-level accuracy
and 0.3 false-positives-per-hour (FP/h);
•the customization of SYNtzulu’s encoding and decoding
slots for the implementation of the proposed approach;
•demonstration of suitability for real-time monitoring, with
inference time and power consumption measurements on
the target hardware, resulting in 0.5 μs and 4.55 nJ per
inference.
The organization of the paper includes a summary of related
work in literature in Section II. The proposed seizure detection
approach is described in Section III, whereas the classiﬁcation
performance assessment is reported in Section IV-A. Section V
summarizes the real-time inference performance evaluation,
whereas Section VI discusses the comparison with the state-
of-the-art in spiking solutions for epilepsy monitoring.
II. R
ELATED WORK
A comprehensive survey about SNNs for epilepsy monitoring
is presented in[13], reporting works targeting seizure prediction
and classiﬁcation. The prediction task requires some assump-
tions to be made on the reference datasets, as an indication
of the onset of a preictal state is often missing. For exam-
ple, the authors of [14] deﬁne a 30-minute preictal interval
and a prediction horizon of 5 minutes, exploiting a spiking
model with 10k parameters to recognize preictal from interictal
samples in the CHB-MIT dataset. In our work, we focus on
the simpler classiﬁcation problem, targeting the recognition of
ictal samples against normal portions of the EEG recordings.
The literature provides several r elevant references, presenting
different processing and classiﬁcation solutions while target-
ing the same open-source dataset [15], [16], [17], [18], [19],
[20], [21].
The authors of [15] propose an SNN model integrating three
convolutional and two dense layers, applied on the Short-
time Fourier Transform of one-second EEG segments, after
ﬁltering out the power line noise and the DC component. A
combination of SNN and Support Vector Machine (SVM) is
proposed in [16], where the execution of SNN inference is
conditioned to a pre-detectio n mechanism based on a power
threshold. The network is applied to power spectrum features,
frequency-encoded into spikes considering 50 temporal steps
for each new item to be classiﬁed. The energy efﬁciency of
these solutions is assessed considering the required energy per
synaptic operation on the Loihi platform [15], or the typical
50 pJ energy consumption for the emission of a spike, and
147 pJ for spike transfer on 28nm technology [16]. These
approaches require the computation of Fourier transform or
spectrum power prior to SNN inference, while, in our work,
we consider raw EEG signals, to reduce the complexity of the
processing.
A solution based on raw EEG was previously exploited in
other works, such as [17], presenting a hardware implemen-
tation of a seizure detection system, exploiting level-crossing
ADC applied to the raw signal and Poisson rate encoding, fed
to a convolutional SNN model. Similarly, the work of [18]
proposed a spiking version of the VGG network, applied on
rate-coded EEG segments of 4-second length, whereas [19]
presented a spiking transformer model with embedding based
on temporal convolutional layers applied to 5s segments of
the raw EEG signal and evaluated on both classiﬁcation and
prediction problems.
Despite being extremely efﬁcient in terms of power and
computational demands, the SNN models in [15], [16], [17],
[18], [19] rely on complete acquisition setups, accessing 18-23
acquisition channels, designing a remarkably accurate but quite
obtrusive system.
On the contrary, it is common, when focusing on wearable
devices, to refer to a reduced set of electrodes. Coherently,
solutions oriented to long-term monitoring outside the Epilepsy
Monitoring Units (EMUs) should focus on seizure detection by
accessing a limited number of acquisition channel s, compat-
ible with a reduced wearable setup, minimally impacting the
normal life of the patients, and avoiding social stigma. This
strict constraint is considered in recent works, such as [22] and
[23], presenting a tiny transformer and a simple Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) for seizure detection based on acqui-
sition limited to the temporal channels, and [24]
, proposing a
self-supervised CNNevaluated based on two bipolar acquisition
channels. The unobtrusiveness of the acquisition device repre-
sented a design constraint for these solutions, which demon-
strated complexity and efﬁciency compatible with wearable
monitoring devices, yet not exploiting the advantages of spiking
computation.
As a direct reference for performance comparison, we con-
sider two different works presenting SNN-based solutions
leveraging access to onl y two acquis ition channels, [20] and
[21]. Both these models enable a high detection rate, leav-
ing some room for reducing the false alarm rate, to improve
the quality of user experience. With this work, we aim to
improve the energy efﬁciency of the state-of-the-art SNN-
based alternatives, with an extremely lightweight model reach-
ing competitive detection accur acy and requiring no addi-
tional feature extraction, thanks to a simple encoding scheme
capturing the most relevant EEG information and ensuring
high levels of sparsity. T he quantitative comparison with
the alternatives from the literature is discussed in detail in
Section VI.
III. M
ETHOD
This section describes the proposed seizure detection mech-
anism, presenting the target dataset, as well as the encoding
scheme and the network model. Finally, we include the descrip-
tion of the necessary modiﬁcations to SYNtzulu’s architecture
for real-time signal encoding, inference, and output decoding
execution.
BUSIA et al.: WEARABLE EPILEPSY SEIZURE DETECTION ON FPGA WITH SNN S 1177
TABLE I
COMPOSITION OF THE CONSIDERED DATA FROM THE CHB-MIT
DATASET
Subject Seizure Seizure Seizure Tested
records events time hours
chb01 7 7 7m i n2 2s 6h4 0m i n
chb02 3 3 2m i n5 2s 2h1 5m i n
chb03 7 7 6m i n4 2s 7h
chb05 5 5 9m i n1 8s 5h
chb07 3 3 5m i n2 5s 9h
chb08 5 5 15 min 19 s 5h
chb09 3 4 4m i n3 6s 9h3 0m i n
chb10 7 7 7m i n2 7s 14 h
chb11 3 3 13 min 26 s 2h5 0m i n
Tot 43 44 1h1 2m i n2 7s 61 h
A. Dataset
The optimization and assessment of the proposed seizure
detection approach targeted the open-source CHB-MIT Scalp
EEG dataset [25], [26], curated by the Children’s Hospital
Boston and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The 23
pediatric patients included in the dataset presented intractable
epilepsy, and were monitored during medication withdrawal.
The dataset includes a list of scalp EEG records of different
durations, typically one hour, annotated by experts who re-
ported the start time and end time of seizure events. The data
was collected with a 256 Hz sampling frequency, including a
variable number of acquisitionchannels, ranging from 18 to 23.
This work targets the development of wearable systems for
continuous monitoring in everyday life, we thus consider un-
obtrusive acquisition setups, limited to the four temporal chan-
nels compatible with behind-the-ear acquisition, namely F7-T7,
T7-P7, F8-T8, T8-P8, according to the 10-20 international sys-
tem. Based on the documented re sults in literature about inter-
patient EEG variability [27], we focused on patient-speciﬁc
epilepsy monitoring, selecting a subset of subjects including
patients ranging from 1 to 11, and excluding patientchb04, due
to a prolonged signal inst ability observed in record chb04_05,
and patient chb06,a si n [24], due to the very short duration of
the seizure events recorded. No additional considerations were
made for the selection of the subset of patients considered for
the appropriate evaluation of themodel, resulting from the order
of the numbering in the dataset. Finally, considering the impor-
tance of accounting for the variabilityof different seizure events
for the same patient, we referred to the leave-one-record-out
cross-validation approach, to test the detection of seizure events
completely unseen during the learning phase. For the training
and test of the models, we consider only records including a
seizure event. The composition of the data is summarized in
Table I.
B. Encoding
EEG signal amplitude and frequenc y are usually especially
affected by the occurrence of seizure events. Based on this
consideration, we selected an encoding approach capable of
highlighting the amplitude variations with time on each of
the considered EEG channels, as represented in the scheme in
Fig. 1. The instantaneous amplitude of the signal is mapped
on one of 16 different amplitude levels, deﬁned based on the
(partial) maximum and minimum value of the signal observed
during the ﬁrst 5 minutes from one of the training records. The
amplitude levels are equidistant, with a step deﬁned based on
the partial maximum and minimum for each channel, which
are matched to levels 2 and 13, leaving four additional external
representation levels for the increased signal amplitude usually
observed during seizure occurrence. The amplitude of the signal
acquired on each channel is thus encoded at every time step into
16 one-hot values.
Combined with the timing of the spikes, encoding the
frequency-related features, this encoding scheme captures well
the amplitude-related information needed for the discrimina-
tion of seizure events, as can be observed by comparing the
resulting representation of normal and seizure portions of the
signal, reported in Fig.2. For each acquisitionchannel, the plots
summarize the input spike count observed on each encoding
level for seizure and non-seizure windows, for one reference
subject, namely chb01. As can be noticed, there is signiﬁcant
discrimination in the input spike distribution, with nonseizure
windows resulting in a spiking activity limited to low-amplitude
levels (central levels, from 6 to 9), and seizure windows show-
ing noticeable activity in levels corresponding to an increased
amplitude.
This intuitive encoding scheme, combined with the simplicity
of the proposed classiﬁer, provides an easily interpretable clas-
siﬁcation, based on the distribution of the input signal ampli-
tude. It is also especially suitable for real-time implementation,
as it only requires the comparison ofthe current amplitude value
with the 16 reference levels considered. Furthermore, it enables
a signiﬁcant amount of sparsity in the inference computational
workload, as on each temporal st ep only one amplitude level
for each channel can receive a spike in input.
C. Network Model
The detection of seizure events on the EEG signal is per-
formed through an extremely lightweight SNN model. The
model integrates the Leaky-Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) neuron,
which evolves based on the current membrane voltage value,
v(t), and based on the input current received in input, as re-
ported in Equation ( 1):
˜v(t+1)= α·v(t)+
∑
w ·s
in(t+1) (1)
where sin(t+1) is the input train of spikes, w are the synaptic
weights assigned to the input connections, and αis a decay
factor. Based on the current value of the membrane voltage, the
neuron produces an output spikes
out when a threshold valueθis
reached, according to Equation (2). Finally, whenever an output
spike is ﬁred, the membrane voltage is reset by subtracting the
threshold value, as reported in Equation 4.
sout(t+1)=
{
1, if ˜v(t+1) ≥θ
0, otherwise (2)
v(t+1)=
{
˜v(t+1), if ˜v(t+1) <θ
˜v(t+1) −θ, otherwise (3)
1178 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025
Fig. 1. Proposed encoding scheme, applied to one acquisitio n channel. The plot refers to an EEG excerpt from record chb01_03. The signal amplitude is
mapped into 16 input synapses, emitting a spike when the amplitude falls with in the corresponding region. A single spike is produced on one of the ampli tude
levels for each newly acquired samp le, with a 256 Hz acquisition frequency.
Fig. 2. Average spike count obtained for the input si gnal in the reference encoding levels, consider ing the available data from t he seizure records of subject
chb01. Spike count is evaluated on windows of 8-second length.
TABLE II
TOPOLOGY AND PARAMETERS OF THE PROPOSED SNN MODEL
Layer Synapse Neuron Parameters OPS
Dense Layer 1 64 8 520 520
Dense Layer 2 8 1 9 9
The lightweight architecture considered in this work integrates
an input layer of 64 synapses, each representing the input spikes
produced on each amplitude level by the signal acquired from
the temporal channels. This set of input synapses is fully con-
nected to a hidden layer including eight neurons, and ﬁnally to
a single output neuron. The network architecture is summarized
in Table II.
The network is trained to encode the classiﬁcation between
the normal and seizure classes in the ﬁring rate of the output
neuron, evaluated on a window ofx temporal steps. The output
rate is thus the sum of the spikes emitted by the output neuron
during thex temporal steps required to process an input segment
of length x. As will be detailed in Section IV .A, the typical
value of x selected for training is 2048, corresponding to an
input segment of length 8 s, whereas for real-time execution it
is 4096.
The model’s training leveraged the Pytorch framework, and
particularly the SnnTorch library[28] for the LIF neuron imple-
mentation. Training is performed with backpropagation through
time and aims at learning the correct output ﬁring rate of the
output neuron for each of the training segments, considering
a target low rate of 0.03 for normal segments, and a target
high rate of 0.35 for seizure segments. The supervised training
routine iterates over the training batches, evaluating backward
propagation based on the training loss, measured as the mean
squared error between the output ﬁring rate obtained on the
output neuron and the target ﬁring rate for the target class based
on the annotations on the dataset. The training is conﬁgured
to complete a maximum of 500 epochs, with Adam optimizer,
batch size 32, and initial learni ng rate 0.001. The best model
is updated based on the loss evaluated on the validation set:
after 20 epochs of patience where the model is not updated, the
learning rate decays with a factor of 0.3. On average, training
required 430 epochs. Model training was performed on Google
Colaboratory.
D. Target Hardware
The proposed method has been implemented on the ultra-
low-power SYNtzulu accelerator [10], shown in Fig. 3.
SYNtzulu is an open-source end-to-end SNN accelerator de-
signed for tiny FPGAs
1. It efﬁciently processes dense spiking
layers, handling 8 synapses and 2 neurons per cycle on two par-
allel cores, while leveraging spike sparsity. The system includes
a compact bit-serial RISC-V microcontroller
2 that initializes the
accelerator at system start-up and manages the I/O data ﬂow
through the SPI and UART modules. Moreover, the softcore
1https://github.com/gianlucaleone/SYNtzulu
2https://github.com/olofk/serv
BUSIA et al.: WEARABLE EPILEPSY SEIZURE DETECTION ON FPGA WITH SNN S 1179
Fig. 3. SYNtzulu’s architecture.
gates the system when idle and automatically wakes it up when
a new set of samples is available, relying on a memory-mapped
timer.
The clock generation system includes both a high-frequency
oscillator and a low-frequency oscillator. The only module con-
nected to the low-frequency oscillator is the memory-mapped
timer. To put the system to sleep, the processor simply turns off
the high-frequency oscillator. The oscillator and the system are
woken up by the timer at the appropriate time.
Moreover, SYNtzulu hosts two application-speciﬁc conﬁg-
urable modules named encoding and decoding slots, that serve
the purpose of encoding sensors’ data into spikes and output
spikes into the result of the classiﬁcation at hand. In this work,
we designed two new encoding and decoding slots to efﬁciently
map the presented encoding and decoding algorithms in hard-
ware.
The encoding slot implementation is a folded lightweight
module that leverages the SPI communication latency to carry
out the encoding computation. The incoming samples, pre-
sented every 32 clock cycles at the input port of the encod-
ing module, undergo a series of comparisons. A BRAM-based
memory holds the minimum channel amplitude levels and the
step values. Initially, the input sample is compared with the
ﬁrst amplitude level; if it is smaller, the amplitude level is
identiﬁed; otherwise, the level is increased by the step value
until the condition is satisﬁed. A four-bit register keeps track
of the number of iterations. When the amplitude level is found,
a 4 to 16 decoder generates the encoded spike set, which is then
written in four entries of the SNN accelerator spike memory in
four consecutive clock cycles.
The decoding slot computes the running sum over 4096
output inferences. To achieve this, the module incorporates a
BRAM-based memory organized as 1 × 4096, which stores
spike values. At each network iteration, the spike count is
updated according to the new spike produced by the SNN and
the oldest spike discarded from the BRAM.
IV . E
XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, we summarize the seizure detection results
obtained in the leave-one-record-out tests of the targeted sub-
jects, including the description of the performance assessment
method and the analysis of the accuracy drop connected to the
parameters’ quantization.
A. Classiﬁcation Performance Assessment
For each subject, having N EEG records showing at least one
seizure episode, we trained N different models, to be tested on
the left-out record. For the training of the model, we segmented
the EEG signal into windows of 8 s length, that is 2048 samples,
representing 2048 (x) time steps. The selection of 8 s as the win-
dow length follows the ﬁndings of previous studies on real-time
seizure detection [22], [27], demonstrating a higher accuracy
compared to 2 s, 4 s, and 16 s window length. A single inference
run is performed to process each newly acquired sample from
the temporal channels, and after 2048 steps classiﬁcation is
produced based on the output spike rate in the 2048 window.
While training data is randomly shufﬂed, for the real-time
seizure detection assessment we consider the test record in
chronological order, and let the network evolve forl time steps,
corresponding to the whole record length. Real-time detection
is evaluated for each newly acquired sample after the ﬁrst x
samples have been processed. The output ﬁring rate is evaluated
with a sliding window approach, referring to thex−1 previous
time steps, and it is compared with a patient-speciﬁc thresh-
old to discriminate between normal and seizure segments. A
common solution exploited in the literature to ﬁlter out isolated
false alarms is to post-process the output with context-aware
